---
layout: post
title:  "Topology of Numbers - III"
date:   2020-05-17
categories: Book-Studies
mathjax: true
---
*(Introduction to continued fractions. Chapter 2 of [Topology of Numbers](https://pi.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/TN/TNbook.pdf).)* 

$$\frac{p}{q} = a_0 + \cfrac{1}{a_1 + \cfrac{1}{a_2 + ... \cfrac{1}{a_n}}} $$

A concise way to write this is
$$ \frac{p}{q} = a_0 + 1\nearrow a_1 + 1\nearrow a_2 + ... + 1\nearrow a_n = [a_0,a_1,\cdots,a_n]  $$

## The Euclidean Algorithm
The process for computing the continued fraction representation of a given rational number uses the Euclidean algorithm.

Here is an example, \\( 19/7 \\)

$$
\begin{align*}
19 &= \color{red}{2}\cdot7 + 5 \newline
7 &= \color{red}{1}\cdot5 + 2 \newline
5 &= \color{red}{2}\cdot2 + \color{blue}{1} \newline
2 &= \color{red}{2}\cdot1 + 0 \newline
\end{align*}
$$

Therefore, \\( 19/7 = \color{red}{2} + 1\nearrow\color{red}{1} + 1\nearrow \color{red}{2} + 1\nearrow \color{red}{2} \\)

The Euclidean algorithm can also be used to find the greatest common divisor of two numbers. If one divides the larger number by the smaller, then the last non-zero remainder is the greatest common divisor. Here, \\( \text{gcd}(19,7) = \color{blue}{1} \\). 

The idea behind finding the gcd is as follows: \\( a = q\cdot b + r \\), then any common divisor of \\(a\\) and \\(b\\), will also be a divisor of \\(r\\). Then, \\(gcd(a,b) = gcd(b,r) \\). Then, we can use this process recursively with the break condition that \\(gcd(c,0) = c\\). For a rational, this process must terminate as \\(r < b\\).

Note that Euclidean algorithm is more convenient than using the prime factorization to find the gcd.

How are Farey diagrams related to continued fractions? Firstly, define the convergents of a continued fraction as the number obtained by summing the first \\(k \\) elements in the continued fraction representation. The last fraction is the number itself, whose continued fraction representation we are studying.

E.g. \\(19/7 = [2,1,2,2]\\), the convergents are \\( 2,3,8/3,19/7 \\).

Let's study a geometric way to connect the continued fraction representation to the number itself. Consider \\(7/16 = [0,2,3,2] \\). We use the three numbers \\(2,3,2\\) to construct a strip of three large triangles subdivided into \\(2,3,2\\) triangles respectively from left to right.

